This is an interview with Gabor Nagy by Catherine
Mays on November 24, 1990, at his home concerning
the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. In the interest
of accumulating knowledge, I am asking you to
donate this tape to me or to the Texas A&M Oral
History Collection in the University Archives.
Is that all right with you? Yes, it is. All right,
let's begin with where were you born and when? I was
born in Hungary on the 5th of June, 1941. My father
was a tool and die maker who worked in the same
factory ever since he was 12 years old and my mother
was a seamstress who was working out of her home to
make some extra money. So what was life growing up
in Hungary? Growing up was it was a very hard life.
My father And my parents never owed anything, you
know, and everything was...
Everything we had, they had to work real hard for.
They didn't have any personal possession. They
could never own a house or... The only thing my
father had, the best of his possession was a
bicycle. I mean really he didn't have anything.
Bicycle he had.
He had the bicycle that he used to go to work on and my
mother had a sewing machine. And the apartment
where we worked was affiliated to us by the
the factory where my father was working. In other
words, they took so much of your wages off, and then
they provided the rental was taken out of the
wages, the medical insurance, the fees for that
was taken out of his wages. And by the time he
brought the money home, it was hardly enough to
make it from one paycheck to the next. So it was a
hard life. So what were the effects when
Khrushchev came in and he started announcing his
destalinization policies? Were you all aware of
these policies? I faintly remember these things
because I was still a youngster and it was in the
earlier days and I was only about, I would say,
eight to ten years old, just barely, you know,
starting my years as a student, you know. a
school-aged child, but I heard my father
mentioning certain things about it, you know.
They didn't like the way Stalin was doing. He
forced his ideals on everybody and killed a lot of
people. I think Stalin was much worse in his own
ways than Hitler ever was because everything that
Hitler did came onto the surface, you know, all the
stuff that Stalin did was just, you know, buried
away and it was just, you know, it was pretty bad and
we didn't feel too We felt pretty good that
de-Stalinization was going to start and we were
going to bury it away with his death in 1953, but
communism didn't change that much. People were
still starving, people were still overworked,
they didn't get enough wages for their work. It was
just another phase of communism as far as, you
know, Hungary was concerned. So you'd say you
wanted complete freedom from communism? Yes,
yes, we did want to complete freedom from it, and
de-Stalinization probably was a step toward
total freedom, but it was, you know, we had a whole
long ways to go. And how did the other countries,
Poland, Austria, and Yugoslavia, how did those
countries who had somewhat more freedom make the
people of Hungary feel? Well, those people, you
know, we were all in the same kind of regime. We were
all under communistic rule, you know. But those
nations, you know, they felt the pain that Hungary
felt, and we were all trying to, you know, I
guess... Like a big family, you know, we all
comforted one another and we were all looking for a
way out of it and that's what the Hungarian
Revolution of 1956 started, you know, and
everybody benefited from it. Do you feel it began
with the students or with all of the people of
Hungary? I think that at the beginning the
students really kindled the flame to get
something started, especially the students of
Poland, who had a big demonstration on the 23rd of
October, 1956, that really started the youth of
the Hungarian universities on the same track. And
they also started a big uprising the following
day. And then all
this, the news got around throughout the nation,
and the workers When my father worked, for
instance, he was the big organizer to get the
strike started, which backed up the students in
their demands. What changes did the students and
the people of Hungary want to see in 1956? Well, the
students had a proclamation a couple days after
the revolution started. I think it was on the
second or the third day they had a 12-point demand
that they put in front of the...
that the people were demanding, you know. And one
of the demands were freedom of the press, freedom
of religion, freedom of speech. And they just
wanted a total freedom away from all the... You
know, they didn't want the KBG to go... go in the
middle of the night and arresting people. They
just wanted a total freedom of all of that. What
kind of leader did you feel in the students'
village that Imre Nagy was going to be for your
country? Well, Imre Nagy, he was a good person who
was in
parliament previous to the 1956 revolution and he
was one of the persons who wanted the total freedom
from communism and his government he was you know
after the revolution started which was a very
short lived because it ended in a couple of weeks
time but he he He wanted what the student wanted,
and then the total abolishment of communism and
all the points that the students put forth, he
acknowledged them. So when he was put in as premier
of Hungary, how did the people feel when Nagy
was... Oh, they were overwhelmed, and everybody
thought that the revolution's going to survive,
and they started to open up all the prisons, so the
prisoners, political prisoners, went free, and
they really looked forward to... to a new way of
life. So when the Soviets began to intervene, and
they started coming in, what were your first
memories? Well, it was pretty bad. See, I lived in
Debrecen at the time, which was the eastern part of
Hungary, and that was really close to the Russian
border, about, I would say, about 10, 15 miles,
that's all. And it was really bad because... One of
the points of the student proclamation was to
break away from the
break away from the Warsaw Pact, which stated that
the Soviet troops were allowed to stay in Hungary,
you know, and the student says, we don't want the
Warsaw Pact, we want to break away from it, we want
the Russians out of the country, you know, out of
Hungary. And when I saw the Russians coming back
in, we knew that there was something, some
trouble. Now, what had happened is that while Imre
Nagy was the premier, another government was
formed secretly behind him who asked the Russians
help. that's how come the Russians the tanks
started coming in you know and that's that's that
was the turning point when the Hungarian
Revolution you know when the Soviets intervened
that's when the Soviets intervened and that was
like on a Sunday of November 4th and Monday
November 5th when when the Russian tanks were just
coming back in you know and then they broke down the
revolution When Nagy asked the revolutionaries,
he's like, you know, stop, you know, stop
fighting. Did you feel like he was just being
influenced by the Russians by, you know, saying,
asking, just wanting the revolution to be
stopped? Well, Imre Nagy, at the beginning, he had
to kind of...
pleased both parties at the beginning because he
wanted to have the wanted to please the existing
government and on the other hand he was he was
really in favor of the revolution and in the
beginning he was kinda was telling everybody
actually to stop fighting is not a bad thing to ask
you know you can stop fighting and you can resolve
your problems or resolve your requests as a you
know at a diplomatic way, you know, and so stop
fighting wasn't a bad request, you know, and you
know we would all, you know, wanted to do that. So
you did want to stop fighting? We did want to stop
the fight and then resolve it legally. And they did
stop fighting. But when the Russian tanks came
back in, that's when things were kind of lost. You
couldn't fight against the tanks and everything.
So that kind of put an end to it. What were some of
your memories? Do you have memories of the... Oh
yes, there's a... This section really could go on
for hours and hours, because I can expand on the
revolution, you know, as little as it short-lived
it was, but there was a lot of things happened over
there, really. If you want me to expand on certain
parts of it, maybe we can do that. You want me to do
that now, or is it... No, go ahead. Expand on some of
the memories you have of the days of the
revolution. The earlier days of the revolution
was very trying because there was a lot of street
fighting, and as I earlier said, my father was...
working in this, uh, locomotive factory as a tool
and die maker. And he was the person who organized
one of the major strikes in Davidson, uh, because
this factory employed about 10,000 people and
they were all, all workers. And my father was
working there from, uh, when he was 12 years old
until that time. And, uh, 56, he was, he was about,
uh, 40 years old at the time, you know. Actually he
was, yeah, well anyway, and he was like a foreman
and he had a lot of influence with the people. And I
remember He told the people to go on strike and the
next couple of days they took my father away in jail
and then they held him there until he releases a
statement to the press that the people would go
back to work, that he would ask the workers to go
back to work. he would not he wouldn't do that so
they kept him in jail he was in jail for about a week
you know until close to the end of the month in you
know until like October 28th or 29th you know of
1956 and then he decided
and when he found that things were starting to
deteriorate and everything, he did sign a
statement and told the people to go back to work,
you know, but it wasn't really a statement that he
wanted to really do. He knew that the revolution
was kind of doomed anyway. This was his way of
getting out of prison, you know. So when they let
him out, That's when my father came home that very
night, and we picked up all our belongings. I have a
sister who is a year younger than I am. He also lives
in Haltom City, and he works with General Dynamics
now. But just the four of us with all the money that
my mother and father, all their savings, and just a
coat on our backs and a suitcase, so we took off. And
then we came out from Debrecet, from Debra's end to
the iron
curtain. The iron curtain was nothing more than a
fence, an electrified fence of about six foot high
that
It was called the Iron Curtain, you know, and that
was from the western. That was about three to four
hundred miles long along the western part of
Hungary. Mostly, the most fortified area was
around Austria. Austria and actually the border
between Hungary and Austria is not very large but
the border was going around more on the western
part of it. But anyway, so we took a train from
Debrecen to Austrian border which is about I would
say about 300 miles and being my father a
locomotive factory worker he was able to start a
freedom train from Debrecen all the way to through
Budapest to western part of Hungary and this train
started and everybody got loaded up in Debrecen
the whole train about 15
cars, you know, and then we all went and they didn't
stop until it got to the other side. And about 50
miles from the western border we
heard the news that there are some Russians at
Sopron, which is the very final city, you know,
before Austria. that there were people over there
waiting for the train to come through so they can
arrest everybody. So what happened at this point,
the train stopped, and everybody got out, and we
took the rest of the way, the last good 50 miles.
Well, actually, I don't remember exactly how much
it was, but we walked all night. I mean, all night
long through... fields and no streets. I mean, it
was pitch dark. It wasn't a night where there was a
full moon. I mean, I was just petrified because one
time I lost my, I lost contact. I hold my sister's
hand, but my sister wasn't holding my father's
hand. So kind of, but anyway, I was already 15 years
old, so I wasn't really that scared, but my sister
was started to cry. She was 14, but she cried. But
anyway, and then we came to this, we had to stop.
During the day, we hid in fields of hay, you know,
and we were waiting for the night to come, and that
evening, we were hiding a whole day in the fields,
and we didn't dare go out, you know. We hardly ate
anything, too, I remember that. and at night we
went to this village and we knocked on people's
door trying to ask them directions how to get to uh
how to get over to Austria you know and finally this
person says oh I'll I'll get you over there I know
exactly the way how to go and everything and my
mother gave all the all the money that we had
because we didn't have any use for it in Austria and
uh he He got lost and we got caught. I mean, we were
caught, you know. And when we were walking over
there, all of a sudden a flashlight shines into my
father's face and asked him where they were going,
you know. So my father didn't answer. He said, if
you don't know where you're going, you know, you
don't need to ask that question you know where
we're going so then we got arrested you see and then
we got to this place where they were about it was a
border patrol station and there were about 20 30
people already arrested that night over there we
were the only people as a as a as a family you know
everybody was kind of like single you know and uh it
was very sad my mother was crying and everything
and later on uh The place, gunshots were fired, you
know, and we thought that perhaps the place was
attacked by freedom fighters, so we're going to be
all freed again. But it wasn't the case. The
lieutenant who was the
controlling person of the border, he came in drunk
and he was shooting his gun in the dark, you know. So
at that time, my mother went in and took a bottle
of... We got a little whiskey, a couple of bottles
of whiskey, because my godfather had a
restaurant, and he had some whiskey and some
brandy hidden away, you know, because they took
his...
restaurant away, you know, it was more like a pub,
you know. and uh but he had some hidden whiskey and
gave us a couple of bottles and my mother gave one of
the bottles to the guy who was drunk and in return he
he would ask us he asked if he if he would let us go you
know and he did you know and he let us go and he even
gave a soldier to to show us through the border you
know because we were the only family you know
everybody was single so He probably figured,
well, you know, he's got reasons that he... If he
would have gotten sent back to Debrecen, my father
would have probably gotten a bad sentence or
either life or he was... A lot of people were
sentenced to life imprisonment or sent to
Siberia, you know, or executed. This we found out
after he got settled in America, you know. But
anyway, it's... That's how we got across and we got
to Austria. There are a lot of things happened in
Austria. And if you want me to expand on that, I can.
I was going to ask you, this time during the
revolution, did you feel that other countries
should come to your aid? Or did you all think they
were going to come to your aid? Well, during the
course of the revolution, Radio Free Europe had
mentioned and pleaded several times with the
United Nations and specifically to Hungary, to
the United States, to interfere and to liberate
the Hungarian people. And it was a big, big
disappointment that nobody came to the help of the
Hungarian people. But later on, you know, the
people realized that really, if they would have
interfered with Hungary, it would have been
interference with the whole Soviet Union. So it
would have been a little bit bigger deal than just
taking care of the Hungarian people. I'm sure
that... the Russians would have, you know, really
gotten, you know, on the side of the Hungarians and
it would have, could have, you know, start the
Third World War. So with this in view, you know, it
probably was better that the United Nations
didn't come, you know, because it could have
started the Third World War. But it was a big
disappointment because, you know, we lost our
freedom. We had it for two weeks and that was it. So
you were able to listen to Radio Free Europe? You
did have access to it? Radio Free, yes. We had
access to Radio Free Europe in those two weeks
because they were constantly jamming the signal
and not much of the stuff was coming through. But
during the course of the revolution, you know, it
was pretty clear, yes. So you were able to get to the
United States. You can go ahead and expand. Yes.
OK, well, just shortly, I don't want to take up too
much time. But in Austria, when we came to Austria,
the Austrian people were so good to help to pave the
way of these people who came from Hungary. During
the course of the revolution, about 150,000
people died. because of the atrocities and the
killings of the Russians and the communist
people. The AVO, they called them, is the
Hungarian secret police who really went after
these people and they killed them, you know, and
tortured them and everything. And another
150,000
fled the country and they said afterwards that
another 100,000 was deported and killed after,
you know, they got after the people who were part,
who took part in the revolution and they caught all
of those people. So more than a quarter million
people were either killed, displaced or sent to
prison because of this revolution. We were
fortunate enough to leave the country and come to
the United States. We had trying times in Austria
because everything was so disorganized.
Austrian people did the best they could, you know.
I remember we walked the streets for two, three
days because the government was so disorganized.
This thing happened so suddenly And with such a
massive, you know,
the people were just coming so fast all through
Austria, you know, that they weren't ready for it.
So the Austrian government was dependent on the
people to take care of the immediate needs of the
Hungarians. So we were we were called in from the
streets, when we were walking down the streets,
people opened their doors and said, come on in,
we'll give you breakfast, or come on in, we'll give
you lunch, you know. This was for a couple of days
until the government did come and got more
organized and put us on buses and we went to a place
in the mountains where they had a big hotel and they
put us up over there. What were some of the feelings
toward the U.S.? I always, I don't know why, but I
always had a sixth sense about, you know, that I'm
going to go to the United States. When I was a little
child, I always yearned to come, and I probably
would have come even if my parents would have
stayed over there. The people were very
open-minded and looked very favorable upon, you
know, the United States. And even though we were
fed all this, you know, brainwashing about how the
differences between colored people and white
people, you know, were, it was all went, into smoke
because, you know, this wasn't really what was
happening. It was just, you know, when I first saw a
first colored person in Austria, he was a doctor,
and he's the one who examined me because everybody
who, you know, came had to go through a thorough
examination, and it was just wonderful. He was a
doctor, and I, you know, We thought under
Stalinism that there's a great depression of the
colored people, and between the coloreds and the
white, they had racial differences. In the United
States? Yes, in the United States. And I didn't
think that was true. There might be some
differences, but not as deep as what they were
saying.
So what do you feel, what were some of the things
that happened when you first got to the United
States? Well, after Austria, we were still in
Austria from the 3rd of November until
January of 1957, which was January 7th or 8th. is
when we finally got out of the... we were living in
an Austrian hotel for about a month and a half and
they were saying that somebody will come from the
Hungarian consulate and will give us visas to the
United States. At this time, the United States had
opened up the quota to let a certain amount of
Hungarian refugees in due to the revolution, and
they let 20,000 people in Hungary, from Hungary to
the United States, and we were trying to be one of
the 20,000 and My family felt the need to leave the
camp and go to Vienna on our own so we can surely make
the quota because we were kind of close already.
You know, everybody was filling in. We got some
free train passes from the mountains. It was about
90 miles or 100 miles from the mountains. We had bus
passes, we had train passes, and so we got to
Vienna. We were looking for the consulate. I spoke
a little German, so we were able to manage our way,
but somehow... The police caught us because we
were wandering up and down the streets and we were
kind of curious looking bunch. So they arrested us
because they really didn't arrest us, but we
didn't know where to sleep. So they took us in jail
because that's why they had the most room. So when
we went over there, but the people in the jail did
not know that we weren't prisoners, you know, so
they treated us like prisoners for about a day or
so. We had to go to bed early and get up real early
also, and then we were given just the prison food,
and we had to go do the chores. We had to get up and
wash the foot. And after that, I told them, we're
not prisoners. We're here to go to the United
States. We need to go to the consulate. And they let
us go, you know. And I remember this was during the
New Years of 1956.